Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Pascal Boyer. He is the Henry Lus Professor of
Individual and Collective memory in the departments of Psychology
and Anthropology at Washington University in Saint Louis. I'm
Leaving a link to our first interview in the
description down below and today we're going to talk
about religions in the wild, ritualized behavior, ownership, psychology,
victim devaluation, and other related topics. So Dr. Boyer,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
have you back.
Thank you for having me, and it's a great
pleasure to talk again. Thanks.
OK, so, uh, I would like to uh to
start by asking you a little bit about religion,
which was the topic we ended on in our
first interview. And just to go back to it
a little bit, uh, now I have, uh, just
a couple more questions about it, 3 or 4
questions. So, first of all, what are religions in
the wild? What does that mean and, and what
can we learn from studying them?
Well, this is a, um, a notion, you know,
we talked, we talk about wild traditions or religions
in the wild, um, which is a way of
emphasizing a very strong difference, that important difference there
is between Uh, two kinds of religious traditions. So
when we talk about religion in general people think
of various things they're particularly familiar with like a
religion is something that has its specific doctrine. It
says things about the world. It has certain concerns
like morality, the end of the world, you know,
that sort of thing. But also religion comes with
a certain organization and with, uh, specialized personnel like,
you know, Olama in, in, uh, in Islam or
priests in, um, in Christian denominations or ministers. And,
um, also there is a certain identity that follows
from being a, uh, an adherent to a particular
religion, like you're a Christian or a Muslim. Um,
NOW, many of the world's religious traditions are not
at all like that. Um, THEY don't have a,
uh, specified explicit, and, um, articulated doctrine. They have,
um, rather sort of, um, loosely organized sets of
ideas, but more importantly, they don't have real, um,
organized specialists. Um, AND finally, they don't really have
an identity. So I need to give examples because
otherwise that's very abstract, but, um, People who consult
a shaman in most of the cultures that have
shamanism or healing or practices of this kind, um,
go to see a specialist who is not a
member of an organization really in most cases, and
he's not really someone who Uh, whose function is
to, um, broadcast the particular doctrine. Um, THESE people
want to see a specialist that has, who has
a certain sort of technical ability to address particular
problems. And in fact, if we look at religions,
religious traditions or in in the world in small
scale societies before large scale societies and also before
states and before literacy. We see that most of
these, uh, religious traditions were of that kind, that
is, um, individual specialists who address particular problems rather
than a doctrine sustained by organization. But also if
you look at many of most of the um
uh religious traditions in the modern world, you see
that you still have a lot of what we
call wild traditions. So, uh, for example, in, um,
in Islam, you have a certain core of religious
practice that's sustained by the doctrine, um, you know,
of Islam. And is sustained by the um by
the Oma, the specialists of those texts of Quran
and hadith, but you also have all sorts of
practices like for example, you know, curing people's problems
or misfortune by various kinds of magic. You also
have, um, excuse me, saints that is particular, individuals
who have a particular power. Uh, TO address people's
problems or to solve conflicts and things like that.
So you have these two things in parallel. Um,
IF you look at Hinduism, of course it's an
even better example in the sense that the religion,
the official religion, the doctrinal religion is not really
concerned with all the stuff people do that has
to do with minor gods or goddesses rather, um,
witchcraft and things like that. So, um, the wild,
uh, tradition is a bit like the weeds in
the gardens. Uh, YOU know, it's something that's always
there, that keeps growing there, and that is, uh,
quite important to people's religious activities. And to pursue
this, you know, analogy with weeds, if you do
any gardening, you know that weeds will come back,
whatever you do to get rid of them. And
I think it's very much the same, except, you
know, we don't want to have the negative connotation
of weeds that's invasive and parasitic. Wild traditions, that
is the idea that some specialists are personally different
from other people, and that can help you address
problems like Accidents, illness, misfortune in general, that is
an idea that will come back whatever the doctrinal
religion tries to do. In many, in many cases,
the religious organizations try to disparage or derogate these
wild traditions by saying that they're just magic or
there's popular superstition or things like that. And what
we were trying to do, and when I say
we, is because this is a project that was
sustained by cooperation with Harvey Whitehouse at Oxford and
Claire White, who is at California State University, Northridge,
we tried to say that we should systematically study
those features of wild traditions, so to speak, that
are not quite represented in doctrinal religion. So what
we were trying to do was to sort of
make the picture a big balance when we talk
about religion, to not focus just on the stuff
we're familiar with, but also these um more sort
of, um, um, more sort of informal forms of
religious traditions.
And are there specific features of religion that the
study of religions in the wild sheds light on?
Yes, so the, the, the main thing, and that's
the sort of um. Main concern of most of
those traditions is that they are there to, um,
to address misfortune. They're mostly about that. So if
you talk about, um, doctrinal religions, you have all
sorts of concerns like, um, how is the world
created, uh, where does evil come from? Where is
the world going to, um, how can you, how
could the soul be saved? That sort of preoccupation.
Now, in wild, in what we call white traditions,
these are absolutely not the questions that are, um,
of, um, that are, um, addressed. The main question
that is addressed repeatedly is why this, why did
misfortune happen and in particular, why did this particular
misfortune happen to this particular person at this particular
time? Uh, SO the question is not, um, as
it, as it were, a sort of theodicy question,
you know, why is there bad stuff in the
world? It's more a question of why did I
get this particular, um, uh, disease, catch this particular
disease, why this person, uh, lose their jobs? Why
is this, um, uh, person, uh, this, um, um,
This person, why did my crops suffer from, you
know, some light or something like that, whereas others
did not. So it's intensely focused on explaining, but
also, of course, palliating or avoiding this kind of
misfortune. That's the main thing.
Mhm. And I mean, more broadly speaking, how do
you approach the study of misfortune from a scientific
anthropological perspective?
Well, the, the good thing about working on misfortune
is that there's a lot of it, uh, so
it's not something that's, you know, we're not gonna
run out of, uh, things to talk about. Um,
THE way we, we, we've decided to, to, to
work on this was, um, of course, to study
not misfortune, um, as such, but more, um, the,
the kinds of reactions people have, the psychology of
explaining misfortune on the one hand, but also the
way these things become what's called cultural products, that
is common ideas within a group or a community.
So, It's interesting that in, um, any place you
go in the world, people will have some kinds
of ideas about what brings about particular misfortune to
particular people. Um, SO one example could be it's
witchcraft. Uh, THAT means there's some other person in
your social environment who, whether they, they're aware of
it or not, um, is, is actually, uh, bringing
misfortune to you in some mystical ways. Um, SO
that's the, the witch. Um, THERE could be, um,
another interpretation, which is that, um, you are, uh,
sick or you, you, you lost your job or
whatever because the gods or some spirits are not
pleased with you, uh, because you've, um, committed some,
uh, you've, you, you've breached some taboo or violation
or something like that, or for some reason you
didn't perform sacrifices in a proper way. Uh, YOU
could have another explanation which is karma. That's a
sort of popular theory in in many cultures that
somehow through, you know, accumulation of good deeds and
bad deeds you've brought about some misfortune because your
account is very much in the red in moral
terms. Um, YOU can have another, and in many
modern societies, we have another kind of explanation, which
is that, uh, people bring misfortune onto themselves. Uh,
THAT is, you know, you were actually, you know,
in a way you had it coming as as
people would say. Um, SO, um, the idea would
be that, well, you got mugged, uh, you know,
in the street, but after all, what were you
doing walking out in that street, you know, late
at night, you know that neighborhood is not very
safe. Uh, THAT'S the kind of explanation we, we,
we like to favor. So what we were interested
in was, um, The kinds of explanations that you
find, particularly in what we call wild religious traditions,
like it's mostly about either the spirits or the
gods are not really happy with you or they
want to hurt you, or some other person wants
to, to, to hurt you. That's witchcraft. And what
we thought was remarkable in those things was that
In all these cases, um, the responsibility is very
focalized on a particular person, either the witch or
the victim themselves. Um, THAT is, uh, misfortune is
not, people are not interested in explaining misfortune in
very generic terms. Um, AND in fact, people in
many places have. A combination of two kinds of
explanation of misfortune. Like, for example, if I have,
um, you know, if they, um, say a common
problem in many, um, uh, cultures, a woman is
not, uh, bearing any children, she seems to be
sterile. And people will, of course, in many places
go consult Western style or, you know, modern doctors
of some kind who will say that there is
a problem of, you know, conception and people accept
that entirely. I mean that's, you know, this person
does not have children because something's wrong with her
body. That's not a problem at all. But the
thing is, why did that problem with her body
occur? In that person at that time, you know,
that is what we need to explain is the
particulars of the case. Um, TO which, of course,
um, any sort of scientific perspective on the world
has no particular answer. Uh, YOU know, you, you
caught this disease because the virus is multiplying inside
your body. Well, why you? Well, the, the virus
doesn't mind which bodies it's invades really. Uh, SO
it's not against you in particular. Now, these wild,
uh, religious traditions, um, are there to answer a
particular question, which is why you, why now? Why
in this particular case? One thing that, um, we've
realized in, you know, um, uh, comparing, uh, doctrinal
religions on the one hand and the sort of
white traditions that, uh, doctrinal religions have very little
to offer to answer that question. Uh, SO, you
know, to take a Christian sort of, uh, perspective,
that's most familiar to many people, um, why did
you get, why did this person get cancer and
not that that other person? Well, basically, in a
Christian perspective, this is either part of a plan
that we cannot understand, or, um, it's just there
and we all have our, you know, uh, crosses
to, to, to bear and things like that. And
what matters is your relationship to God, which is
a very general thing that is not about you
in particular, you know, not, uh, not explaining the
events in your life very much. So it's no
surprise in, you know, our perspective is that It's
no surprise that the wide religions keep coming back
like weeds in the sense that people are faced
with people who have questions like, you know, why
did it happen to this person at this moment?
The doctrinal religion says almost nothing about that. It
says things about You know, evil or, uh, suffering
in general, but it doesn't say anything about you
now. Um. So the white tradition has a sort
of market advantage in a way because it addresses
something that the consumer really wants, which is, um,
some way of thinking of this particular case, um,
in its particulars, like, you know, why did it
happen now and not in another way. So, we,
we think that, you know, very often you'll find
that, um, wild developments, wild religious traditions development, um,
occur, um, are more likely to occur in, um,
In traditions that don't really have much of an
explanation for a particular misfortune. Um, SO for example,
you know, um, in, in many places where people
would identify as Buddhists or would say they follow
the Dharma, you know, the the Buddhist way or
tradition. Uh, YOU'LL find that lots of, um, um,
people, of course, have to resort to, um, To
local specialists to address disease, misfortune in general, and
all that. Um, FOR example, I, I, in one
of the articles I, I cited this example of
people who are Buddhists, they're perfectly fine with Buddhism
and the entire sort of thing. Um, HOWEVER, they
want um lamas, you know, to come over and
bless their fields. To get rid of pests, you
know, like caterpillars and things like that. So that's
a particular problem they want to address. And if
the official doctrinal religion does not address them, then
they'll resort to specialists who do.
Mhm. So, uh, I'm also interested in the kinds
of psychological mechanism mechanisms that are behind the different
kind of anthropological phenomena that we can study in
the, in this particular case when it comes to
religions in the wild, in one of your papers
you present. The model to account for the gross
cultural recurrence of the themes that you talked about
there that is based on two main features of
human psychology, namely epistemic vigilance and threat detection psychology.
So could you explain that model?
Right. Well, so the model is, um, um, first
of all, the model is a model about the
interpretation of misfortune that's, um, that's, um, based on
a strategy in evolutionary, uh, psychology, which is to,
um, try and reverse engineering, this sort of phenomena
we see in, um, happening in, um, uh, in
minds and, and saying what is this for? What
does it do? So, in order to do that,
you have to start with the conditions of, um,
the conditions under which people lived in, um, throughout
millennia of evolution, uh, you know, of, um, evolutionary
history, so say for. Um, FOR modern humans, it
would be 200 to 300,000 years, but it's much
more, of course, if we count erectors and other,
um, um, pre-modern humans. Now, the thing is that
these people were mostly, um, foragers who lived in
small communities. And had a um technology that is
not negligible, but that has, um, that can be
said to be relatively simple. And the life of
hunters gatherers, we know that from prehistory and we
know that from current from anthropology, is not an
easy one. That is, people have to deal with
all sorts of problems like parasites, that is microbes
and infections, congenital diseases. Accidents are very common in,
of course, the hunting and gathering life. So this
life is not as, you know, some romantic description
of, um, ancestral life would, would have it. It's
not an easy one. It's one in which there's
a ton of, uh, problems to do with accidents
and diseases and illness. So that's one thing, and
we know that from prehistory because we know that
from the bone record that people had all sorts
of problems of this kind. We know that from
contemporary hunters gatherers. Another thing we know about that,
and, and that's a very, very important feature is
that lots of people received help. That is to
say we have evidence, for example, of people who
are born with congenital diseases who survived those those
insults for a long time. We have evidence of
people who had fractures or partial paralysis who survived.
Now, and we know also from contemporary small scale
societies that this is something that happens now with
that. Uh, SUGGESTS is that there was, uh, help
provided to those people. And as I said, uh,
these are societies of simple technology, which means that
there isn't that much to do to address, um,
disease or accidents, um, except social support, which means
you keep feeding and you keep protecting someone who
cannot contribute as much as the others to. Um
TO production or to protection of the group. And
that's very important because, um, and there we're getting
into a sort of evolutionary model, uh, because the
thing is that all this in the end has
to, uh, be, um, those behaviors have to in
some sense be, um, in some way, sorry, be,
uh, fitness positive. They have to be good for
the reproductive potential of the people who engage in
those, uh, behaviors now. Um, PROVIDING support to people
who are the victims of misfortune. Uh, CREATES a
real dilemma. Uh, IT'S a real dilemma because of
the way cooperation works between humans. Um, AND our
cooperation is based, um, and that's true for the
smallest group and the largest societies, it is based
on two major features. Um, ONE is partner choice,
uh, which means that you are not forced to
cooperate in the same way with everyone. You choose
the people who are more, um, beneficial to you
as cooperators. Which, as many, uh, evolutionary anthropologists or
psychologists agree, um, uh, argue, sorry, um, is the
reason why we have standards of fairness. You know,
you do not want to, um, have, uh, too
much exchange with people whose norm of behavior is
to exploit you. On the one, on the other
hand, you don't want to be overgenerous all the
time because, uh, that is bad for your fitness.
It might be good for others. So we have
partner choice, which means we choose people. And there's
a second part of the second sort of phase
of this, of this cooperation, psychology is reputation, you
know, the, the way you choose between, uh, people,
uh, is based on information you have about their
behavior. And we know that again from the smallest,
uh, um, foraging societies where people have very clear
ideas about who is better at exchange in a
particular domain. And we know that from, um, um,
you know, um, modern places, and we know that,
for example, one of the ways in which, um,
internet, uh, exchange works is that it has reputation
mechanisms, you know, you can complain about people exploiting
you in some way or other. You can rape
them, you can, etc. So we have partner choice
and we have reputation. Now the, the, the, the,
the, the, these two are important because to go
back to someone who's a victim. A once someone
is a victim of misfortune, they can't produce as
much as the others. They can't protect you because
they're, you know, weakened by their problems. Also, it
may be that some of their misfortune is due
to incompetence, in which case they're not great as
cooperation partners, you know. Now, that faces people that,
that creates a dilemma in the sense that you
should limit your support to such people. You should
limit your support to victims simply because helping someone
who cannot really reciprocate that much is a loss.
So in terms of your own fitness, you should
not help them too much or you should limit
your health. However, limiting your help is a way
to lose reputation as a cooperator, as a generous
cooperator, and that reputation we know independently is a
very important aspect of human cooperation. So you're faced
with a dilemma which is if I help this
person too much, I'm losing. If I do not
help that person and it's known in my group,
I'm losing, um, fitness. So you can't be, you
know, the, the, the, that's the dynamma which are
you, whatever you do, you know, it's, um, it's,
it's not great. So what we thought was, well,
um, there is a way out of that dynamo.
And a way out of that dilemma is to
think and to have others think, agree that the
person who is um um has experienced misfortune might
be partly responsible for their misfortune. Which means that
they might be partly in a position where they're
exploiting you by requiring your help. So that may
be a bit surprising because we don't think people,
you know, break their legs just to be to
exploit others. But there is an element of suspicion
that if you were more careful about not, you
know, treading on banana peels, you would not create
this problem for others. So it's partly your, um,
it's partly on you. And um so the, the
sort of evolutionary interpretation of this cooperation dmma would
say, well, in this case we should see that
people are strongly motivated to think and to have
others think that the victim is partly responsible or
at least that some person is responsible, but not
me, as it were, you know, so. Um, AND
that would be, um, and, um. A sort of
elegant explanation, it seems. Um, TO the, to one
very common feature of those explanations of misfortune which
I mentioned before, which is that they're always concentrated
on particular individuals. So it's not the structure of
the world that made you sick. It's not in
personal forces. It's someone, a god, a spirit, a
witch, or yourself by your, by your own um
negligence. So what we've been doing is trying to
see, well, is it the case that in the
world's cultures, Explanations of misfortune tend to focalize on
particular individuals as opposed to generalize the responsibility. And
is it the case that this has to do
with the, um, um, help that can be provided
to people? And you know, so we've done cross
cultural studies of that on the one hand, but
also experimental studies on the psychological mechanism of explaining
misfortune.
Yes, and we're going to come back to the
topic of victim devaluation toward the end of our
conversation today. But just to close off the topic
of religion, uh, let me ask you one more
question. Do religious beliefs psychologically differ in any fundamental
way from other kinds of beliefs? Is there anything
special about them?
So I think, you know, the anthropologist Morris Brock
said that religion is often central, but it's nothing
special, and I think that's a very good slogan
for the sort of psychological approach to those things.
No, I mean the, the, um, you know, over
the last sort of 40 years or so, people
have done cognitive studies of religion or cognitive science
of religion, and in many cases what this shows
is that The, the, the, the mechanisms, the processes
you have, um, in terms of acquiring beliefs, maintaining
beliefs, um, and using them in explanatory ways. They're
the same you can find in other domains. So,
um, it's, it's not special. So in a way,
you could say that, um, um, You know, um,
most of what we know that explains religious beliefs
is not about religion at all. It's about more
general sort of psychological processes.
So, moving on to the topic of ritualized behavior.
Of course, this is something that we can also
find in religions, but what is ritualized behavior? What
characterizes it?
Well, this is, um, um, research that, um, I
did some time ago in collaboration with Pierre Leonard,
who's so sadly died a few, uh, a couple
of years ago, and we, um, and it was
mostly Pierre Leonard who had this, um, who started
this, um, um, research, this program in which we're
trying to say, why is it? THAT there are
common features in ritualized behavior in many domains like
for example, the behavior of obsessive compulsive patients on
the one hand, but also the rituals that you
find in religious practices in many places seem to
have common features like the rigid sequence of actions
that you must follow. Um, NO explanation for the
components of these actions, you know, you must follow
them in a particular order, but each of the
sub-actions, so to speak, is not really explained. BUT
also a sense of compulsion that you must do
it, otherwise bad things could happen. And, um, and
also an extreme attention to performance when you're, when
you're performing it, that is when you're in the
middle of the of this kind of ritualized behavior,
either as an OCD patient, an obsessive patient, or
as a religious practitioner, you're very much focused on
the exact Uh, performance of, uh, particular actions that
are typically complex enough that you couldn't perform them
automatically, like you do your shoelaces or you, you
know, or things like that. Um, SO, um, that
problem, of course, was not something that we discovered
because even Sigmund Freud, uh, uh, uh, said, uh,
talked about that, and he had a short article
called, um, uh, uh, Neurosis of repetition and religious.
Um, uh, BEHAVIOR and, uh, but it was very
disappointing. I remember reading it and thinking he must
have some crazy idea about how that connects to
sexuality or something else or something like that, but
not at all. The, the, the, the, the small
article sort of concludes by saying that maybe religions
are in a sense the obsessive compulsive, um, condition
of an entire group. And that OCD or he,
he called that repetition and neurosis, is in a
way a religion of the individual, a sort of,
uh, you know, individual, individualized, um, religious tradition. Which
is very disappointing because it's saying these things. ARE
similar because they're very similar and they might be
more or less the same thing. So, um, what,
um, What Pierre and and I as a sort
of follower of that same model we tried to
explain was what is the cognitive structure that's um
what is the cognitive mechanism that's involved in these
kinds of behaviors and We first tried to, to
show that, um, ritualized behavior in this sense of
exact attention to particular action. IS something that exists
in particular contexts, but it's not rituals. Rituals that
the, the, the term ritual is a very wide
term that has been used in many contexts in
different ways. There is no point in trying to
find whether there is what is the definition of
rituals or the characteristics of rituals. It's a bit
like religion. It's a term we have because we
inherited this concern from previous traditions, you know, classicists
talked about ritual because they were faced with Greek
and Roman religion, which was not all like Christianity
in many respects. So then anthropologists found rituals in
other places. Um, NOW, Pierre and I published an
article a few years, uh, back in the, um,
um, you know, collection on rituals to say this
concept is not a proper one, you know, this
is not, it's a bit like, you know, having
a theory of, uh, white objects, white objects or
a theory of, uh, of, uh, red, uh, things.
It's, it's not going to work because that's not
natural property. Uh, Richard's behavior on the other hand,
that is something special. It's a special state of
mind. And we find it in both OCD pathology
but also in some aspects of religious practices sometimes.
And it's, um, it's based on a, it seems
to us, it's based on a sort of special,
uh, use of our threat detection psychology. Uh, AND,
you know, as a result of evolution, we have
a special psychology to deal with threats like contagion,
contamination, uh, predator invasion, um, enemies, um, things like
that. Um, SOCIAL strife and problems, and the idea
there was that the things that prompt you to
engage in ritualized behavior are very often phrased in
the same way as those threats. Like for example,
there is you must do this or that to
purify your soul, which is a clear sort of
metaphorical transfer from the domain of contagion. And contamination
and how do you purify your soul? Typically you
perform actions that are to do with washing, uh,
you know, cleansing, getting rid of, um, of, um,
dirt and impurities and things like that. It's, um,
so it seemed to us that a lot of
this, um, the saliency of these ritualized, um, actions
sort of recipes that are offered to people, um,
is it stems from the, the this connection to
threat detection. So you're, you're given something that is
extremely easy to understand, you know, uh, so for
example, your, your soul. Uh, WHEN you commit bad
actions, your soul becomes impure. Um, IF you, uh,
go and, um, uh, bathe in, in, in, in,
in, uh, the sacred river, your soul will be
purified. None of that is difficult to, to represent
for people because they already have that psychology, which
is the psychology of contagion and contamination. Um, SO
we, we, we tried to say that this would
explain both the sort of special concern people have,
you know, people are in a special mental states
when they perform these actions. But also the, the,
the, the, the sort of repertoire of uh of
themes, the fact that it's always about purity, impurity,
about boundaries, um, uh, about defense against invisible enemies
and things like that. That does not explain all
the features of rituals, but it's in our, in
our view, it explains one part that is really
important, uh, which is the Um, which is ritual
behavior itself and the themes that it conveys.
So does this approach that you explained there, uh,
could, could it apply also to the study or
to psychiatry more generally and specifically the study of
mental conditions like you mentioned there, OCD or obsessive
compulsive disorder and anxiety.
Yes, so, um, in our um um description of
um ritualized behavior, we owe a lot to uh
models that were developed to, to, to, to describe
the OCD pathology and in particular proposed by Henry
Seshman and Eric Woody. Um, IN a model where,
um, what they try to emphasize and they tested
it, um, On, um, animal models and, um, uh,
and you know, in, in other ways was that,
um, um. Ritualized behavior happens in patients not because,
not just because of an exaggerated concern with threats
like, you know, washing your hands 10 times because
they may still have germs. It's not just that,
but it's also a failure of a system to
close this anx anxiety provoking thoughts. In non OCD
individuals, uh, if you fear that you have germs
in your hands, you wash your hands, and then
the anxiety about that goes down. Um, IN many
of these patients, the anxiety level remains the same,
and that is why they repeat those actions, because
the, the, the, the motivation for those actions is
still there. Now, uh, was Saman and Woody and,
um, um, also that was tested on animal models,
on animals by, um, on rodents by David Ela
in Israel. Um, THE, the idea was that this
failure to close, um, the, the, the action, uh,
was characteristic of OCD, um, in general, in more
global terms, This was part of a general movement
which has become more and more, um, extensive over
the last 10 to 20 years, uh, which is
to, to think of psychiatry in terms of evolutionary,
um, um, um, in an evolutionary perspective as having
to do with the way minds are designed. So
for anxiety, it's, it's, it's, um, it, it's, it's
quite clear that most of the targets of anxiety
are things that are of evolutionary relevance like germs
contamination, but of course most crucial is social anxiety,
the fear that others are not, um, um, the
fears the fear that others are not prepared to
see you. As a valuable sort of exchange and
cooperation kind of person. The fear that they might
gang up against you also things like that are
quite clearly related to our evolved motivations to have
social support and to have cooperation. Now for other
conditions, of course it's much more mysterious and I'm
In a sense, relieved that I don't have to
explain that because I'm an anthropologist and I don't
do that work because um in other conditions it
may be more, more complex, but you know there
are evolutionary psychologists or evolutionary psychiatrists who are doing
lots of work on, on that, especially Randolph or
Randy Nassi, who's been publishing a lot on this
sort of Darwinian approach to mental condition. This is,
it's a pretty difficult, um, um. Kind of enterprise
because the taxonomy and the causality in psychiatry are
very much, uh, contested and, and, and, and in
fact, very problematic. Um, AND it's always difficult for
an evolutionary model if you start with something that's
vaguely defined or vaguely understood. Excuse me. For example,
it makes no sense in a way to say
that you want an evolutionary theory of religion because
religion is a term that's applied in such a
vague and confusing way to so many different things
that what is it exactly you're trying to explain?
And that's why in our wide tradition we said,
well, we'll focus on one thing that we can
precisely define which is Explanations of particular misfortune in
terms of mystical processes that people cannot actually observe.
And that's why also in the case of OCD,
we said, well, we'll focus on one thing which
is ritualized behavior in the sense of attention to
detailed sequencing and all these things because these are
things that are easy to define. But if you
said, I want an evolutionary explanation of madness, then
it's going to be a very confusing kind of
operation because you don't know where to start. Um,
WHAT is the exact phenomenon to explain.
So, shifting gears a little bit now, uh, tell
us about ownership psychology. What is ownership psychology? What
exactly do you study there?
Well, this is a project that uh started a
few years ago when, um, The idea was just
that, um, ownership is universal, you know, everywhere people
have ideas about ownership, you know, this is my
thing, this is my. This is your thing when
we transact, uh, when you, when we exchange that
thing that was mine is not mine anymore and
so on so forth. This is something that's extremely
easy for human minds, uh, but also as psychologists
have pointed out, it's interesting because it's invisible. There's
nothing about, you know, this, uh, pen that shows
that it's mine. It's not a physical property of
that of that pen. So it's interesting because it's
something that the mind has to project onto objects
and relations between people and objects. So how does
it do it? Now, um, one way to study
that, that was very, uh, very fruitful, very, very
productive was, let's see how children acquire those notions.
Because after all, you know, uh, notions, these notions
appear, uh, in children's behavior pretty early, but they
appear in a way that is not quite the
same as what we, um, uh, what adults in
their communities would, uh, would, would do. And some
psychologists like Cori Friedman in the states, but others
as well have done lots of extremely good research
showing that young children, sure they don't have the
same database of how property works, you know, the
same explicit principles as it were as adults, but
they do think about ownership in terms of implicit
principles that are very, are very, um important and
appear. APPEAR very, very early. One principle like that
is that all else being equal, the first possessor
of an object is the owner of the object.
Like, you know, if I pick a flower in
a meadow, it's my flower, now it's not yours.
We were walking together and you picked another flower
and it's yours, it's not mine. Um, SO that's
the first possession principle, but also, um, children have
rather sophisticated, um, um, ideas about, uh, about ownership.
Like, for example, if, um, I have a blob
of potty or play dough as we call it
in America, and I, it's mine, you know, I
have it and it's in my hands and stuff.
Then I put it on the table and then
you create something really nice out of it, you
know, like some statue or something. Well, now, even
though I was the first possessor, you are the
owner in the sense of this statue because you've
put work in it, work in it. Um, NOW
this is something that is not just in 3
year olds, ideas of ownership, but it's, it's also
something that um philosophers like John Locke had, you
know, described as one of the foundations of property.
It's the work that is put into. So I
was wondering where do these ideas come from, and
it seems that there are two sources for these
ideas. Um, THE sort of sophisticated adult ideas about
ownership. First of all, I'm talking about intuitive ownership,
you know, your sense that it's mine, it's not
yours, or, you know, that sort of thing. I'm
not talking about the laws, the legal system, um,
or the um or other social norms like that.
I'm talking about individual intuitions that just show up,
you know, when Someone, if someone takes something out
of my pocket, everyone around will have the assumption,
the, the intuition immediately that, uh, they acquired something
that was not that. Now, um, so, uh, it
seems that there are two sources to that. One
is the, the psychology of, um, possession and competitive
acquisition that we have in many species, including humans.
That is, for example, your territory is yours because
you occupy it and because you defend it. And
once someone is trying to intrude into your territory,
you try to attack them and you know there's
a lot of game theory about those things that
was initiated by John Maynard Smith. And other people,
um, after that, of course, that, um, models the
fact that for example, in, um, in most cases,
it's worth um combating, combating intruders fighting them and
um so that one should expect that. Previous possessors
of something will put more energy in defending it
than intruders will put into taking it. However, this
creates situations of equilibrium in which what the biogists
would call a bourgeois equilibrium in which you defend
what you possess, but you do not intrude on
other people's possessions, and they defend what they have,
but they don't intrude on others. Now that's one
source of our intuitions, but it's not, um, it's,
it's, it's, it's important. And it certainly has influenced
our intuitions, but there's another component to that. Um,
THAT is just as important or perhaps more important
in human behavior, which is the psychology of cooperation.
She is that, um, to some extent this bourgeois
equilibrium. Only predicts that I failed to attack you
when, when you don't, um, sorry, that I do
not attack you because you would defend your property.
And it doesn't predict something that we find in
most human groups, which is I just do not
attack you because that would be something even if
you were not defending your territory, that would be
something that would be losing all reputation in terms
of cooperation. So I would be a net loser
even if I acquired things. In most cases, all
else being equal as usual. Um, SO that comes
from the psychology of cooperation and in particular from
the, the idea that people are trying to exchange
to, to, to create mutually beneficial. Uh, EXCHANGES with
others. Uh, THE clearest expression of that psychology, I
think, uh, is a series of models proposed by
Nicolas Beaumar and Jean Mattiste Andre in France, um,
um, that are trying to to propose evolutionary models
of this kind of fairness-based mutual, uh, mutually profitable,
um, exchanges now. Respect for property, so to speak,
is something that comes with the psychology of cooperation.
It could not come from the mere bourgeois equilibrium
because the bourgeois equilibrium will predict that the minute
someone fails to defend their territory, I should immediately
have the motivation to invade it or take their
possessions, but that's not what we see in human
societies. So basically the idea was how do we
explain some paradoxes of property. And the main answer
is that some of the non-paradoxical sort of features
of property are easily explained in terms of, um,
evolved competitive equilibria. Uh, BUT some of the interesting,
uh, specifically human and Sometimes surprising aspects of our
ownership come from our country of cooperation. Um, I,
I, you know, there are many examples of that
kind of stuff, but I, I, you know, since
we're not talking for, you know, a few, we
don't have more than a little bit of time.
I think just one that I used in one
article, which is that, um, you tell me a
very funny joke. And I tell that very funny
joke to my friends. Now, did I steal someone
something from you? Everyone would say, Well, no, I
mean that's the way it is. Then we're both
going to a party and you wish to impress
people by having a super funny joke and you
tell me the joke and we arrive at a
party and I tell the joke. Now did I
take something from you? Yes. Um, AND the final
example is you're a comedian, I'm a comedian. You
have a very funny joke, and I use it
in my show. Now people are totally definite. I
stole something from you. Now, it's not the case
that there are official norms about how to share
jokes and stuff like that, or if you, if
we say that we'll have to have a norm
for every single thing in the world. But what
we see in those examples is that um in
the first case, We had no sort of cooperative
exchange, you know, it was just, you know, information
is free and it's, it's not very important. You
gave me a joke, I give it to others.
In the second one, I was a bad cooperator
because you were about to gain some social status.
By telling a joke, and I stole this. I
got that social status instead of you. So I
damaged you, I damaged your sort of welfare without
any reason for that. So that's a clear violation
of cooperation. So there are lots of informal aspects
of ownership in everyday life that I think can
be explained by cooperation and not by competitive equilibrium.
Right. And I mean, there are several different applications
of this approach to ownership psychology that you talk
about in your papers. There's, for example, understanding disputed
ownership in the case of indigenous rights, for example,
historical changes like the evolution of slavery, and cultural
appropriation, slavery, and so on. I mean, would you
like to tell us about one of these examples
just to illustrate what you're talking about?
Right, well, OK, so one that is very easy
because in a way it's already, it's been explained
already in by other people and, and, and, and,
um, is slavery, um. So, um, slavery existed in,
in most societies beyond a certain level of complexity.
You have slavery in Native Americans in Africa, in,
in Asia, in Europe, etc. um. When slavery became
something contested, uh, when, um, um, English or British
and then American, um, um, movement started that said
that slavery was, um, was something that should be
abolished in principle, the entire thing. Um, WHAT did
they say? What were their, their arguments? The arguments,
the ones that moved the political sort of atmosphere
were not really that it's logically impossible to own
a person or that owning a person. IS a
concept that we should change. No, it was that
slaves are treated in a very cruel manner and
that the life of slavery is not dignified, etc.
ETC. So in a way what they were appealing
to was that these people that you have enslaved
actually should be. In your domain of cooperation, and
since they're in your sphere of cooperation, you have
to uh engage in mutually profitable exchanges with them
like trade, like employment, but not forcible, uh, work,
um, um, without compensation. So, um, in a way,
slavery was, um, the, the, the, the notion that
slavery was something that should not, uh, persists. WAS
done not because people changed their concepts of ownership,
but it's because they changed their appreciation of others
as moral uh um actors and moral patients. Uh,
SO it's widening the sphere of cooperation and morality
is what happened. Um, BUT, you know, there are
many other examples like that. I mean, cultural appropriation
is kind of Um, uh, a fun example because
usually both sides argue in a way that, um,
is based on intuitions of ownership that cannot be
reconciled. Um, IF you start, you know, um, Making,
uh, I, I don't know, hot dogs, uh, people
will say you're appropriating something that is genuinely American
and it's, you know, Americans invented it first and
stuff like that. So Americans will protest this cultural
appropriation. You're in Europe and you would say, who
cares we had sausages and bits of bread long
before you guys, you Americans called it a hot
dog. And both sides in a way are talking
at cross purposes because that is not the point.
The reason why Americans would protest that this is
a cultural appropriation is not a question of who
did it first. The question is by using a
term that is specifically American, you're diluting the value
of our cultural norms, and of course no one
will do that about hot dogs because no one
cares. But it can be sort of a hairstyle
that's, you know, some people, some African Americans, for
example, in the US would say it comes from
Africa, it's us, and of course the people against
that were on the other, you know, in the
other camp would say no, no, no, you know,
Europeans did it, you know, the Vikings did it
and stuff like that. Uh, BUT that's not the
point. The point is that people are saying we
have something that is a cultural marker, an ethnic
identity marker. Uh, IF you can use it all
the time, then we've lost something. We've lost, um,
uh, a signal of identity. We'll have to invent
a new one. So you've created a cost in
us, whereas we didn't create a cost for you.
That's a violation of cooperation. That's why we find
it really annoying that you are, um, you know,
doing those things that are kind of African style.
OK, so for the last part of our conversation,
let's go back to the topic of misfortune and
victim devaluation. So who do we consider to be
victims of misfortune? How do we determine that?
Well, OK, so people determine it very, uh, clearly
in their, in everyday life in the sense that
There are lots of situations in which people will,
um, uh, will request help from others and will
need social support. And in these situations, people, I
think, intuitively identify the dilemma of cooperation, so. As
I said, in, in many, um, uh, religious traditions,
you vocalize the, the, the responsibility on, um, another
person like the witch, another agent, like a spirit,
or the person themselves. You violated some, um, some,
um, ritual sort of, uh, uh, prescription. So what
we tend to do in our sort of modern
societies is mostly the last one that is focalized
responsibility in the victims themselves, and this is what's
called blaming the victim or victim blame. Um, THIS
has been studied by psychology mostly, mostly. Um, IN
the context of sexual assault in which people would
typically say, Well, this woman was assaulted by some
guy's boss, and then you have this series of
things, but she was wearing this, she was behaving
in a particular way. She was because it's usually
she, she was in a way inviting a certain
behavior. And what I thought was interesting was to
see, you know, does this. Um, SO, first of
all, the, the, the, the, the study of this
kind of thing has been done in that particular
top on that particular topic of sexual assault, mostly,
and psychologists have really done a lot of work
on that. Now, the a problem possible difficulty is
that This is a very special context in which
there is of course misfortune and victimhood and responsibility,
but there's also notions of mating psychology, you know,
sex psychology, etc. THAT may be combined with our
notion of misfortunes. So what we thought was, well,
we should first study things that are more banal,
like in one of our studies, you know, you're
frying some something in your kitchen and the pan
catches on fire and your kitchen is more or
less destroyed and now you have to pay for
that. Now, um, And the question is, you know,
how do other people react to this situation. Now,
if our model of the dilemma of cooperation is,
is, um, is valid, uh, we should predict that
people, for example, um, would be more willing to
blame the victim if they think the victim has
no value to them as a cooperator. And the
reason for that is that if the victim has
value to you as a culprit, then helping them
would be profitable, would be a good strategy, whereas
in terms both of reputation, you're helping someone in
need, but also in terms of future cooperation, whereas
if the person is a poor cooperator. Uh, THEN
what's the point? But the problem is that if
you say, well, she or he burned his kitchen,
that's his fault. Then you sound like a bad
cooperator. However, if you say, Well, he did that,
but note that as he was frying that food,
he also went to the living room to watch
some TV. Then you are clearly sort of providing
a version of events in which not helping them.
It is OK because it's not a violation of
cooperation, you know, you're just sort of saying that
these people, if this person, if they do that
and they receive my help, well, they're exploiting me
because they could have saved me that cost. So
we, we run quite a few experiments to see,
well, is it the case that people, for example,
um, will blame the victim. More if the victim
seems to be a poor cooperator like for example,
if it's a selfish person, and that seems to
be the case that really works. Um, ANOTHER aspect,
another consequence of that model would be that, um,
very simply, the amount of resources you're willing to,
to, to, to. To sacrifice to help someone should
be proportional to the degree to which you blame
them or you find them of bad character. And
also that's also what happens in, in experiments. Now,
now the thing is that now we're trying to
do two things. One is to extend this to
other places because we've done that mostly in sort
of modern American contexts. But also, um, what would
be interesting is to see, does it extend to
those more dramatic cases? Like, um, I think it
extends very easily to things like, uh, you, someone
was mugged in the street and we say, oh,
but He was work, it was, you know, that
was a bad neighborhood, he should have known. Um,
I don't know to what extent that will also
um be relevant to sexual assault, but the idea
is to say, well, maybe. Our reaction to misfortune
in general is that we immediately identify misfortune of
others is that we immediately identify that there might
be costs for us, but if we don't pay
those costs, there may be a reputation cost for
us, and we have to navigate this. Um, YOU
know, in one of the articles I cited this,
uh, sort of wit the epigram, um, by Larou
Foucault, who was a moralist, French moralist. You know,
16th century, 17th century, who said that we bear
the misfortune of others with great courage and fortitude,
and that's very funny, but at the same time
it's false. The misfortune of others is a big
problem for for us because we are a cooperative
species. The misfortune of others is a cost to
us in many possible ways. One is reputation, one
is the direct cost of helping them.
Mhm. But how do people evaluate the victims' cooperation
potential?
Well, uh, what we did was to just do
it for them, so to speak, because we manipulated
the fact that this person gives signals of being,
um, either a good cooperator or a bad cooperator.
Now, there are um many ways in which you,
um, evaluate the value of a potential, the potential
cooperation value of a person. In many cases, excuse
me, um, one of them might be just their
group identity. Um, YOU expect more cooperation from members
of your ethnic group than from members of other
groups, and that is why, for example, Uh, cooperating
with people who have a very strange accent or
are clearly ethnically different from you would be something
that people sort of gauge. We know that there
are striking experiments like, um, uh, Katie Kinsler did
that a while ago showing that young children. American
children, like that's like 33 year olds. If I
remember correctly, um, would have no racial preferences, you
know, that's sort of like white kids do not
mind if a kid is black or white. And
when it comes to choosing a play partner, you
know, playmate. However, they tend to be reluctant to
play with someone who is the same race, so
to speak, uh, but has a different accent. Like
a British kid will have problems in on an
American playground because they speak in a different way.
So why would that be the case? Well, it's
because accent is very clear indication of group identity,
and it seems interesting that even young children have
this notion that accent is a good predictor of
thought, whereas skin tone isn't. Then they grow up
in a society where it is, and they acquire
this idea that skin tone is a predictor of
cooperation, but ethnic group would be one, personality would
be another one, and of course past behavior and
reputation, you know, I know about this person, but
I also know what people say about that person.
I know that people who interacted with that person
and so so on and so forth, and that
gives me an idea of how valuable cooperation would
be with them. There's also the history of cooperating
with me in the sense that to the extent
that someone was not a great cooperator in the
past, you infer that it's their sort of cooperation
profile. That's the way they behave, at least with
me. Um, AND therefore I cannot expect great benefit
from cooperation with them. So that would be typically
the kind of person that I would say was
responsible for whatever misfortune happens to them because I
don't want to be caught in that dilemma of
having to to support them to help them.
Uh, OK, so I was looking at the questions
here you've already talked about witchcraft and karma earlier.
So let me just ask you one more question.
You've already mentioned also sexual assault. So in the
case of more modern industrialized societies, uh, OK, how
can we understand the phenomenon of victim devaluation in
the context of accidents, for example?
Well, That's a very good example because an accident,
um, the, the interesting thing about situations of accidents,
but, you know, lots of other things will happen,
is that, um, part of the causation, part of
the causal chain that led to that particular event,
um, uh, some parts of it are opaque. Um,
SO if I have a car crash, you know,
um, Even if we exclude the obvious thing, like
I'm, you know, I wasn't wearing my, my glasses.
I was drunk, uh, the, the car didn't have
brakes or stuff like that. Even if we exclude
all this, there's a whole domain of possible collision
that imply my responsibility more than others. So, um,
um. And it's quite interesting that uh when people
are afflicted by misfortune, accidents or illness, um, people
spontaneously, um, Generate hypothesis about possible responsibility. Um, YOU
know, if you hear about someone, this is something
that I want to test them. We haven't tested
that systematically, but It's a familiar phenomenon, um, you
know, anecdotally that, um, You know, someone tells you
that someone got a particular, you know, illness, diseases,
cancer or something. Very often people will ask questions
about their lifestyles, about things like that, and I
think it's not, it's related to this question of
to what extent is something that would be partly
their responsibility, you know, did she smoke a lot?
Did you eat lots of, you know, bad food,
uh, stuff like that? Why would people be interested
in that? I think it's not just for the
epistemic interest of understanding the world around you. There's
also, um, a rather sort of motivated aspect to
that which is that Well, to the extent that
this person, um, got that, um, caught that disease,
and it's a disease that typically is related to
something they could have avoided. Then that is um
precious for us to know because it calibrates the
level of help that others could expect us to
provide to that person. Um, I think it's, it's,
um, it's something that's very common. It's not easy
to, um, to, it's not very easy to, to,
to put that in sort of, um, uh, clear
experimental protocols where we could sort of see, uh,
see what happens. Um, BUT it's true that, um,
uh, and I'm sure you've experienced that, that everyone
experienced that, that, you know, you, uh, you had
some problem, you, I, I failed at a particular
thing. And then immediately people are wondering, well, did
you prepare, you know, did you take all the
precautions? Did you do all that was supposed to
be done? Um, AGAIN, these questions, and it's a
general sort of point about doing evolutionary psychology or
anthropology, is that All those things are completely obvious
to us that people would ask those questions and
we would ask those questions. Um, BUT precisely they're
obvious to us because we share the same psychology.
We are the same species. And, um, from the
point of view of, you know, natural selection, there's
nothing natural about these questions. Um, THAT'S the, it's
just, I mean, nothing natural. What I mean is
nothing self-evident about those questions. Um, IT'S the same
as, um, You know, in the case of, uh,
disease and witchcraft, uh, people say we have to
understand why this person got sick at this point.
All of us think that is a very natural
question to ask, so we think it's self-evident that
we should ask that question. However, that question carries
almost no, no lesson for that would be useful
to us. That is, if I'm telling you that
this person got sick because her grandmother was had
bewitched her. How does that help you in any
of your, you know, uh, endeavors? It doesn't. So
there must be another reason for those questions for
the, and it's general in, in, in, in evolutionary
psychology that what you end up doing is making
the very obvious, completely unobvious or unintuitive or certainly
not self-evident.
Great, so just before we go, Doctor Boyer, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Oh well. I think these days it's very easy
to find anything you want on the internet, so
they should just go to the webpage of, of,
um, the webpage that have, which is best cowboyer.net,
and, um, and so there's all these articles, the
references to all these things, but, you know, Google
Scholar or, you know, all these things can give
you those that same information.
Great, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again, as I
said at the beginning, it's always a pleasure to
talk to you.
Thank you, thank you, and it's always a pleasure,
and I would um tell people who just watched
this one to watch all the other ones because
they're all fantastic. Thank you, Ricardo.
Thank you so much. Hi guys, thank you for
watching this interview until the end. If you liked
it, please share it, leave a like and hit
the subscription button. The show is brought to you
by Nights Learning and Development done differently, check their
website at Nights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main
patrons and PayPal supporters Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick
Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting
Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip
Fors Connolly. Then the Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark
Nes called in Holbrookfield governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre
Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray
and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel,
Sardus France David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego
London Correa. Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin
John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas
Fre Franca Bortolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish
Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter
Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank
Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal
Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.